Our previous talk reminded us that it's possible for a family to enjoy peace.
But it takes work.
Let's look at one more step that can help us stay on the road to peace, and that is good communication.
A family promotes peace when all the family members communicate in an open, calm, and honest manner.
But how does communication help with peace?
Well, a pattern of good communication keeps the family close.
It helps us to identify and address problems before these reach a point that they take peace away.
Now that may seem obvious.
But isn't it true that we may find that between work and school and meetings and ministry and recreation and just life in general
that it's hard to find time to communicate as a family?
Is that a challenge in your family?
In the following dramatization, notice what habits hinder family communication.
Hey Steve.
Yeah, I'm sorry I was late to the meeting.
I should have been there to help out with my assignment.
Yeah, we got delayed.
For late.
Let's go, kids.
Yeah, family's fine.
Everybody's adjusting really well.
Anyone see my glasses?
Anyone?
I mean, we might be a little out of sync, but I don't know.
Every family has their issues, right?
You going outside now?
Hey, well, thanks for understanding.
All right.
Okay, take care.
All right, bye-bye.
Did you notice some habits that hinder family communication?
In the case of this family, it seems like technology is stifling their communication.
And they obviously have some things they need to communicate about,
punctuality, dress and grooming, but it's not happening.
Now, while the scenes of them all looking at their devices and ignoring one another
may have been a bit humorous,
did it remind you of your family at times?
What a good reminder for us not to let the use of technology rob our family
of our time and attention.
So how can we develop habits that promote good communication?
Well, let's consider the second Bible principle of this symposium.
Let's turn together.
Please do Ephesians chapter 5 and let's read verses 15 and 16.
Ephesians 5, 15 and 16.
So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise,
but as wise persons, making the best use of your time
days are wicked.
Now let's look at two ways that this Bible principle can help us.
The first is by making time to have meaningful communication.
Did you notice there in verse 16?
It says, making the best use of your time.
Now the study note for this phrase indicates the need to buy out the time for important things
from other pursuits.
So how can this apply to family communication?
Well, this could include having a plan or a routine for when we spend time
together as a family each day.
And during those times we may choose to limit our use of technology
so it does not interfere with communication.
Perhaps it's in the evening or at a specific meal time.
One brother named Aaron stated,
we have our evening meal together which allows us time to talk
and hear what's important to each member of the family.
He says, my wife and I have arranged our schedules
so we take the boys to school and pick them up.
This allows us to spend more time with them.
Then he says, my wife and I regularly take walks
and freely talk about our concern.
What's the point?
Well, they're making good use of their time.
However, to do this they had to buy that time out from other pursuits
but they have a plan, they have a routine.
So what plan or routine does your family have for meaningful communication each day?
If you don't have one, can you start now?
Let's look at the second way that this Bible principle can help us.
And that is by determining when and how to deal with problems
when they do arise.
You notice verse 15 in Ephesians chapter 5 says,
we should walk as wise persons.
That means we need to choose our paths carefully,
knowing when to go, when to stop, when to take another route.
How can that help us when problems arise?
Well, a wise person generally knows when is
and when is not a good time to address a problem.
For example, we all can attest that when emotions are high,
it's probably not the best time to bring up an issue.
One father states, sometimes we need to wait and let things cool.
Often the nights rest with prayer make a big difference
when we address the issue the next morning.
That's a wise person.
A wise person also listens.
James chapter 1 verse 19 reminds us to be quick to listen,
slow to speak and slow to anger.
So thus we can go to Jehovah and Prayer and ask them to help us
to really listen, to stay calm, to stay humble.
One sister named Don states,
when there are problems, the first thing I do is ask Jehovah and Prayer
to help us resolve the problem calmly.
Then she says, then we talk with the family member privately
and really try to listen to their side of the issue.
That's a wise person.
A wise person will also consider the approach and the words
that he or she uses.
For example, rather than telling our family member
that they have a problem, can we turn it around
that it's something that we all need to work on together?
Do you reassure your family members
that you really love them
and you want to understand their side of the issue
or the problem?
So now doing this, we're not attacking the family member
but rather showing that we're all in this together.
So we see benefits of this Bible principle
in communication in our family, don't we?
You notice the two points.
Number one, making the best use of our time
and number two, walking as wise persons.
Now communication will always be a work in progress
but it's worth the effort
as it'll go a long way to bringing peace to your family.
Let's watch more of our dramatization
and notice the benefits of developing habits
that promote good communication.
I don't know.
What do you think?
We all have to work on it.
I know I need to.
Why don't we approach it that way with the kids?
Just be open with them.
That sounds like a good idea.
Okay, so Irene and I have been talking about communication
in our family.
We want to talk about our phones
and other devices.
You're not talking about me, are you?
You can't do that.
I know that we can all be more balanced
but you can't take them away.
I haven't done anything bad.
I have responsibilities.
You're always on your phone too.
It's okay. Let's just talk about it.
All right.
Sue, can you read Ephesians 5, 15, and 16 for us, please?
So keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise
but as wise persons,
making the best use of your time
because the days are wicked.
So how do you think we're doing
with our phones and other devices?
It isn't that what you're doing on your devices is wrong.
Exactly, but could it be taking time away
from more important things?
Like talking to each other?
And in that way affecting even how we're talking to each other?
Yeah.
I think it'd be smart to have some boundaries then.
Yeah, okay.
Okay.
Okay?
Let's talk about how we can do that.
I love you.
Hey.
Evidently, I haven't figured out how to talk to her about her clothes yet.
I need your help.
I got this one.
I know.
But it's all about good spiritual judgment.
Do you think that these trends reflect Jehovah's view of respectable dress?
I know that you'll do the right thing.
While we're all here,
I know we all have different views on punctuality.
But I really need your help
so I can take care of some of my responsibilities.
You think we can meet in the middle?
Yeah.
All right.
Great.
Now this symposium has been discussing four Bible principles
that can guide families to peace.
A brother-dellinger considered the first one
in Romans 12 to 12, verse 10.
And in this part,
we considered Ephesians chapter 5, verses 15 and 16.
Now, did we see how this scripture helped our family in the video?
Well, we saw that they knew down deep
that they were not making the best use of their time.
So they may changes.
They saw that they needed to set boundaries
so they could improve their communication.
And we also saw how the family,
the parents, acted as wise persons.
How?
Well, by determining when and how
to address the problems that needed to be addressed,
such as the use of technology,
dress in grooming and punctuality.
Well, can this Bible principle help your family,
help my family to improve communication?
And would this be a good scripture
to include in your next family worship?
Now, it takes time to learn how to communicate well
as a family.
But it is worth the effort.
Why?
Well, if we strive to communicate well each day,
then communication will come more readily when there are problems.
So be determined to look for ways
to improve communication in your family.
And by taking this initiative and sticking with it,
you will be following the roadmap to family peace.
Please listen out to Brother David Splane,
a member of the governing body,
as he considers the next talk of this symposium,
follow the roadmap to family peace, work as a team.